---
layout: post
title: From Zero to Developer in Six Months with Odin
categories:
 - The Odin Project
tags:
 - learning
---

In November 2019, with almost no coding knowledge, I started teaching myself web development using the free, open-source curriculum from [The Odin Project](https://www.theodinproject.com/). Less than six months later, I was employed as a Junior Software Engineer, was volunteering as an organizer for my local Code for America group, and had a talk accepted at a large tech conference. 

Backing up slightly, I had quit my previous job as a copyeditor almost a year before starting with The Odin Project. During that time, I explored all sorts of possible new careers. I was looking for a new challenge to tackle and was eager to dig into more technical topics after mastering the English grammer rules. After exploring everything from farming to law, I started studying data science around August 2019. I started by completing the free Codecademy courses on Python, SQL, and Pandas. I also found and joined several local data science Meetups, which was my first experience leveraging Meetup for professional interests. I found a wonderful tech community and friends, and I was thrilled by all the events and opportunities surrounding me. However, after speaking with several data scientists over the course of a few months, I came to the conclusion that data science wasn't quite the right path for me. I was looking for something more technical; I had thoroughly (and surprisingly) enjoyed the small bit of coding that I had learned with data science, so I decided to follow that interest into studying web development.

Starting in November, I dedicated myself full time to studying The Odin Project and attending as many local tech Meetups and events as I could find. Although the curriculum was challenging, every completed project brought me a huge sense of pride and accomplishment. Expanding my coding skills was exactly the sort of technical challenge that I had been looking for. While I was studying, I became active on [The Odin Project's Discord channel](https://discord.gg/V75WSQG). In addition, I decided to put my previous career skills to good use and started editing the lessons on The Odin Project, which led to me being actively involved in creating the new introductory Ruby lessons. In February, thanks to my regular participation, I had the honor of becoming a Discord moderator and a GitHub maintainer for Odin.  

Even though Ruby on Rails was falling out of favor in deference to newer, hotter things like Node and Django, I saw this as a huge advantage. None of the bootcamps in my area were teaching Ruby on Rails anymore, having recently switched to teaching Python, so there was incredibily little competition for entry-level Rails jobs. However, the demand for Rails developers was still strong since companies that had created Rails apps in the past decade still needed them to be maintained and expanded. There were certainly more JavaScript jobs listed online than Rails jobs, but the supply to demand ratio worked out to be much more in my favor with Rails. 

Consistently showing up for Meetups and events also opened up several doors for me. First, it allowed me ample opportunities to talk to others in tech, allowing me to explain what projects I had been working on and why I wanted to get into development. This practice was incredibly powerful since I was studying on my own and didn't have collaborators to speak with during the day. Second, it allowed me to get increasingly involved in my local tech scene. I started by attending Code for America meetings that were initially overwhelmingly intimidating. I didn't feel that I had any skills to offer or any way of helping the projects around me, and I almost talked myself out of ever returning. I kept showing up, though, and kept trying to find ways to help, until eventually I had stepped up into an organizer and host role, in which I coordinated our speakers and welcomed everyone to our events. In addition to my involvement with Code for America, I also started hosting bimonthly Code and Coffee groups on Saturday mornings, and I also spoke at several events, teaching others about open-source mapping. Even before I was working in tech, I submitted my talk about open-source mapping to All Things Open, and it was accepted! Third, through networking at these events, I spent a month volunteering as a mentor to recent graduates of a Ruby on Rails bootcamp. Even though I felt wildly underqualified for the role, stepping up anyway showed me that I did indeed have marketable tech skills and gave me considerable practice working as part of a development team.

In March 2019, fulfilling a promise I had made to myself several months beforehand, I attended a tech career fair. I didn't feel that I was ready for a job, especially since I hadn't yet completed The Odin Project's curriculum. In fact, I had only completed 60% of the Rails course. To keep my commitment, though, I went anyway and ended up enjoying myself. I had many excellent conversations with recruiters from various companies, many of whom were impressed that I had taught myself coding. From that event, I received a coding challenge. I hadn't worked with APIs at all before the challenge, so I had to do some quick learning, but being entirely self-taught up to that point meant that I was well equipped to learn a new topic on my own. Just from that single event, I received a job offer for a Junior Software Engineer position! Because it happened before I had felt entirely ready, I hadn't applied online to any companies; it was just that career fair where I had passed out my resume. Building in-person connections and cultivating a local network can be incredibly powerful.

On April 22, 2019, after spending 334 hours studying The Odin Project (which works out to an average of only 16.7 hours spent studying a week, a number that would be quite reasonable even with full time employment), I started my new career, making 50% more than my previous salary. I'm one of many Odin success stories, so I would highly encourage anyone interested in changing careers into coding to teach themselves with The Odin Project. Being completely free, the return on investment can't be beat!

